# Basics

Root file is commonly called `server.js` or `app.js`.

Most functionality is in modules that are not imported by default. The most important ones are `http`, `https`, `fs`, `path` and `os`.

## Creating a server

A web server works like this: a client sends a request to the server, the server then sends a response back to the client.

To use NodeJS to listen to http requests, a server needs to be created from the `http` module. This is done using the `createServer()` function. It takes a **request listener**: a function that will execute for every incoming request.

```javascript
const http = require("http");

const server = http.createServer((req, res) => {
    console.log(req);
});

server.listen(3000);
```

The server can then be 'started' by calling the `listen()` method. It takes a few parameters like the port number and the host name, but the are all optional.

## Inspecting the request

The request is passed to the request listener as the first parameter. It contains a lot of properties with information. Generally, these are the most useful ones:

-   `url`: The URL, everything after the domain name and port number (`/` for the root);
-   `method`: `GET`, `POST`, `PUT`, `DELETE`, etc.;
-   `headers`: an object with all headers that the client sent to the server.

## Sending a response

To send a response back to the client, simply modify the second parameter of the request listener. This way, headers can be added and data can be written to the body. Finally, ending the response makes Node.js send it back to the client. Writing to it after that will result in an error.

```javascript
const server = http.createServer((req, res) => {
    res.setHeader("Content-Type", "text/html");

    res.write("<html>"); // Append text to the body
    res.write("<head><title>My First Page</title></head>");
    res.write("<body><h1>Hello from my Node.js server!</h1></body>");
    res.write("</html>");

    res.end();
});
```

The **status code** can be set using `res.statusCode = 302`.

**Headers** can be set using `res.setHeader('<name>', '<value>')`.

## Event loop

Node.js runs on a single JavaScript thread. To **prevent code from blocking** the current request and any new requests, it uses the event loop. The event loop is atomatically started by Node.js and only **terminates when no processes and callbacks are registered anymore**. While runnign the webserver, there is always one process.

Blocking operations, like I/O operations, are typically handled using callbacks. These callbacks are passed to for instance the filesystem file reading function, which will have the event loop execute the action in the background and execute the callback with the processed data once it is done.

The event loop will execute the following operations in order on each cycle:

1. Timers (if any are due);
2. Pending callbacks (retrieved earlier);
3. Poll for new callbacks. Try to execute them imediately if fast enough or make them pending for later;
4. Check (execute `setImmediate()`);
5. Close callbacks (all 'close' event callbacks);
6. process.exit (if refs are 0, so only when server is stopped).

## Using a routes file

As always, separation of concerns is a good practice. The logic to define the different routes can be defined in a separate function that handles requests and is imported from another file:

```javascript
// routes.js

const fs = require("fs");

const requestHandler = (req, res) => {
    if (req.url === "/") {
        res.write("<html>");
        res.write("<head><title>My First Page</title></head>");
        res.write("<body><p>This is my index page</p></body>");
        res.write("</html>");

        return res.end();
    }
};

module.exports = requestHandler;
```

```javascript
// app.js

const http = require("http");
const routes = require("./routes");

const server = http.createServer(routes);

server.listen(3000);
```

`Module.exports` is a property that any import will look at. It can define one function / value to export, but it can also hold an object with several pieces of data:

```javascript
module.exports = {
    handler: requestHandler,
    someText: "Some hardcoded text",
};

// or

module.exports.handler = requestHandler;
module.exports.someTest = "Some hardcoded text";
```

# Accessing post data

Post data can be accessed using a buffer:

```javascript
const requestHandler = (req, res) => {
    if (req.url === "/message" && req.method === "POST") {
        const body = [];
        req.on("data", (chunk) => {
            body.push(chunk);
        });
        req.on("end", () => {
            const parsedBody = Buffer.concat(body).toString(); // Convert to string
            const message = parsedBody.split('=')[1]; // Split key and value (assumes one key/value pair)
            fs.writeFile("./message.txt", message, err) => { // Write the message to the message.txt file
                res.writeHead(302, { Location: "/" });
                return res.end();
            });
        }
    }
}
```

# Summary

## How the web works

Client => Request => Server => Response => Client

## Program lifecycle & event loop

-   Node.js runs non-blocking js code and uses an event-driven code ("Event loop") for running your logic
-   A Node program exits as soon as there is no more work to do
-   By default the `createServer()` event never finishes

## Asynchronous code

-   Js code is non-blocking
-   Use callbacks and events => Order changes!

## Requests and responses

-   Parse request data in chunks (streams & buffers)
-   Avoid "double responses" (only 1 `res.end()` call at the very end)

## Node.js & code modules

-   Node.js ships with multiple core modules (`http`, `fs`, `path`, etc.)
-   Core modules can be inported into any file to be used there
-   Import via `require('module')`

## The Node module system

-   Import via (`require('./path-to-file')`) for custom files or `require('module_name')` for core and third party modules. `.js` can be omitted.
-   Export via `module.exports` or just `exports`.
