# Debugging

## NPM

A project can be initiated as an npm (Node Package Manager) package to centralize dependencies and scripts. Furthermore, it can be distributed through npm to other developers.

To do so, run `npm init` in the root folder and answer the interactive prompts. The defaults are usually fine.

This generates the `package.json` file with metadata like the package name, the author, a description and a version number. Furthermore it defines scripts.

### Scripts

To make running the project easier, it is a good idea to define the `start` script. In the `scripts` object in `package.json`, a script names `"start"` (with double quotes) can be added, followed by a string containing the start-up command:

```json
{
    "name": "node_js",
    "version": "1.0.0",
    "description": "NodeJS code-along",
    "main": "src/app.js",
    "scripts": {
        "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1",
        "start": "node src/app.js"
    }
}
```

This script can be executed with the `npm start` command, which is shorter than the previous `node src/app.js` command.

A script can have any name (without spaces), but `start` is special. All other scripts can be run using the `npm run SCRIPT_NAME` command (replacing `SCRIPT_NAME` with the name of the script). Omitting `run` in the command will result in an error.

## Hot reloading

In order to avoid the need to restart the node server after every change manually, nodemon can be installed and called instead of node.

To install this npm package, run `npm install nodemon --save-dev`. It will download it and its own dependencies to the `node_modules` folder and add it to the `devDependencies` in `package.json`.

To use nodemon, simply replace `node` in the startup command with `nodemon`. E.g. change the `start` script in `package.json` to `nodemon src/app.js`.

## Debugging logical errors

To find logical erros in the code, the Visual Studio Code debugger can be used. Start it via `Run` > `Start Debugging` (or just hit `F5`) and choose `Node.js` from the dropdown. Set some breakpoints and step through the code like with any other programming language in VS Code.

The `Debug Console` tab (next to the integrated terminal) can be used to evaluate any variables or other statements during execution, even if it is paused on a breakpoint. Any changes made here are not reflected in the further execution of the program, but it can be handy to try some statements at a specific point in the code without continuously restarting it.

To get an overview of all currently existing variables and their values, use the `Run and Debug` tab on the left in VS Code (`ctrl + shift + D`). The `variables` section shows all current variables. Any variables or statements can be added to the `watch` section if they are of particular interest. Below that, the current `call stack` is shown and can be inspected.

In order for the debugger to restart automatically after any changes, go to `Run` > `Add Configuration...` in VS Code, select `Node.js` from the dropdown and edit the `.vscode/launch.json` file:

```json
{
    "version": "0.2.0",
    "configurations": [
        {
            "type": "node",
            "request": "launch",
            "name": "Launch Program",
            "skipFiles": ["<node_internals>/**"],
            "program": "${workspaceFolder}/src/app.js",
            "restart": true,
            "runtimeExecutable": "nodemon",
            "console": "integratedTerminal"
        }
    ]
}
```

`"program": "${workspaceFolder}/src/app.js"` will make sure that not the currently opened file, but `app.js` will always be the entrypoint.

By adding `"restart": true` and `"runtimeExecutable": "nodemon"`, the debugger will use nodemon instead of node and trigger it every time a change is made in any of the files.

Nodemon will be run in a separate process that needs to be closed using `ctrl + C` after stopping the debugger. For that reason, it needs to be run in the integrated terminal.

The `Debug Console` in VS Code can still be used interactively, but it does not show the logs anymore now that the process runs in the integrated terminal.
