# Express.js

Express.js is a web framework for Node.js. It does a lot of the heavy lifting and common tasks, like templates engine, fetching post data and handling errors. This way the developer(s) can focus on developing the core of the application.

## Getting started

Express can be installed via npm

```bash
npm install --save express
```

It can then be imported in `app.js` to be used:

```javascript
const http = require("http");
const express = require("express");

const app = express();
const server = http.createServer(app);

server.listen(3000);
```

Running `npm start` will spin up the server, but it won't respond to any requests until routes are defined.

## Middleware

Express uses middleware to inspect and manipulate requests and responses as they come in or out. Middleware might have the function of authentication, routing, etc.

Middleware can be added using the `use()` function in the express variable (`app`). It needs to be added before `app` is passed to the `http.createServer()` function.

Middleware is defined as functions. Each funtion takes three parameters:

1. `req`: the request object;
2. `res`: the response object;
3. `next`: a function that calls the next middleware in the queue.

Middleware is chained, like an onion. The first function is the outer most layer of the onion, then the next one is the second layer, etc. This continues down all middleware functions. Each function can inspect of manipulate the incoming request and decide to send a response back or pass the request on to the next middleware (`next()`). In the latter case, the response returned by one of the subsequent middleware functions can again be altered before it bubbles up the the previous middleware.

```javascript
const app = express();

app.use((req, res, next) => {
    console.log("In the middleware");
    next();
});

app.use((req, res, next) => {
    console.log("In another middleware");
    res.send("<h1>Hello from Express!</h1>");
});

app.listen(3000); // Shortcut for const server = http.createServer(app) and server.listen(3000)
```

## Routes

Middleware functions can be given a route parameter to only add it to the middleware chain if the route starts with the given string. The order of the middleware matters here: a `/` matches all paths as they all start with a `/`. If that route returns a response instead of calling `next()`, no subsequent middleware will be executed.

```javascript
app.use("/add-product", (req, res, next) => {
    res.send("<h1>Add product page</h1>");
});

app.use("/", (req, res, next) => {
    res.send("<h1>Hello from Express!</h1>");
});
```

The example above returns a response with `<h1>Add product page</h1>` on all routes starting with `/add-product`. All other routes will return with `<h1>Hello from Express!</h1>`.

To define middleware that runs on every request, define it before any middleware returning a response, use a path of `/` and call `next()`:

```javascript
app.use("/", (req, res, next) => {
    console.log("This runs on every request");
    next();
});

app.use("/add-product", (req, res, next) => {
    res.send("<h1>Add product page</h1>");
});

app.use("/", (req, res, next) => {
    res.send("<h1>Hello from Express!</h1>");
});
```

`use()` will register middleware functions that trigger on all HTTP verbs. To make sure a middleware will only trigger on a certain HTTP verb (`GET`, `POST`, `PUT`, etc.), use the specific function for that verb: `app.get()`, `app.post()`, etc. The signature of these functions is the same.

## Parse incoming request data

Parsing POST data is easier with Express than it is with vanilla Node.js.

First install the `body-parser` package from npm:

```bash
npm install --save body-parser
```

Then import it, register its `urlencoded()` function as a middleware (before middleware functions that should be able to use it!) and simply fetch the `req.body`. It will hold a javascript object with the keys and values from the request.

```javascript
const bodyParser = require("body-parser");

const app = express();

app.use(bodyParser.urlencoded({ extended: false }));

app.use("/add-product", (req, res, next) => {
    res.send(
        "<form action='/product' method='POST'><input type='text' name='title' /><button type='submit'>Add product</button></form>"
    );
});

app.post("/product", (req, res, next) => {
    console.log(req.body); // E.g. `{ title: 'Book' }`
    res.redirect("/");
});

app.use("/", (req, res, next) => {
    res.send("<h1>Hello from Express!</h1>");
});
```

## Routers

Express.js has a neat way to split the definition of middleware into multiple files. By creating a router for a group of middleware and importing it into the main `app.js` file, it can be used as a middleware itself there.

```javascript
// app.js

const express = require("express");
const bodyParser = require("body-parser");

const adminRoutes = require("./routes/admin");
const shopRoutes = require("./routes/shop");

const app = express();

app.use(bodyParser.urlencoded({ extended: false }));

app.use(adminRoutes);
app.use(shopRoutes);

app.use((req, res, next) => {
    res.status(404).send("<h1>Page not found</h1>");
});

app.listen(3000);
```

```javascript
// routes/admin.js

const express = require("express");

const router = express.Router();

router.get("/add-product", (req, res, next) => {
    res.send(
        "<form action='/add-product' method='POST'><input type='text' name='title' /><button type='submit'>Add product</button></form>"
    );
});

router.post("/add-product", (req, res, next) => {
    console.log(req.body);
    res.redirect("/");
});

module.exports = router;
```

The `admin.js` file now exports an Express router that contains two routes. Importing and using this router in `app.js` now has the same result as defining the same two middleware functions right in the `app.js` file.

An extra advantage of this approach, next to overview and separation of concerns, is that adding a prefix to all the routes in a groups is easy now:

```javascript
app.use("/admin", adminRoutes);
app.use(shopRoutes);
```

All routes in the `admin.js` router are now only triggered if the path is prefixed with `/admin`: `/admin/add-product`.

## Static file serving

The file system of a project is not accessible via the browser by default. This is good, because users should not be able to view the code of the application. There are a few exceptions however, e.g. css stylesheets and images.

To use static file serving, register the `express.static()` middleware:

```javascript
app.use(express.static(path.join(__dirname, "public")));
```

This will cause all URLs with a file extension to be forwarded to the `public` folder relative to the `app.js` file. This way, a stylesheet could be loaded:

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/css/main.css" />
```
